What is a network switch?
A network switch connects devices in a network to each other, enabling them to talk by exchanging data packets.
Switches can be hardware devices that manage physical networks or software-based virtual devices.

A network switch operates on the data-link layer, or Layer 2, of the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model.
In a local area network (LAN) using Ethernet, a network switch determines where to send each incoming message frame by looking at the media access control (MAC) address.
Switches maintain tables that match each MAC address to the port receiving the MAC address.

Why are network switches valuable?
Switches form the majority of network devices in modern data networks and carry huge amounts of traffic in telecommunications provider networks.
They offer full-duplex communication, connect network segments, boost network performance and make effective use of available bandwidth.

Network switch vs. router
Network switches can be easily confused with routers. However, they have different functions and operate on separate layers.


Network switch vs. router
 
Here are the main differences between a switch and a router:
1) A network switch is a Layer 2 device on the OSI model. A router is primarily a Layer 3 device.
2) A router moves data between two or more computer networks, while a switch facilitates the sharing of resources by connecting multiple devices on a single LAN.
3) To determine the route and destination of a packet, a router examines the IP addresses of packets. A switch looks at the MAC address of each device to transfer data to the correct destination.
4) Routers use data packets, whereas switches, which are part of the data-link layer, typically work with data frames.
5) A switch is less sophisticated than a router because, unlike a router, a switch doesn't use routing algorithms to direct data around large networks.
6) Routers can work within both wired and Wi-Fi networks, but a switch is restricted to wired network connections.
7) A router offers network address translation, NetFlow and quality of service, while a switch offers none of these services.


Network switch vs. hub
Here are the main differences between a switch and a hub:

1) While a network switch is a Layer 2 device on the OSI model, a hub is a Layer 1 physical device.
2) A hub is relatively simple compared to a network switch because, unlike a switch, it doesn't keep track of the addresses of the computers it transfers traffic to.
3) The goal of a hub is to connect all the nodes in a network, whereas an Ethernet switch connects all the network devices together and transfers data packets between those devices.
4) Because a hub can't manage data going in and out of it as a network switch can, there are a lot of communication collisions.
5) Switches prevent collisions by buffering Ethernet frames, but hubs cannot prevent collisions as the devices are connected on a single transmission stream.


